# Block 1: Exercise 4 - Long explanation/solution

In this exercise we have a particle walking in a one-dimensional lattice. It can walk to the left or to the right. And we can calculate the probability that the particle is at a position n (discrete; origin is 0) after N jumps. The final equation is written down.

## 1. Derive the equation using Sterling's approximation - useful tips

In an overview, we can divide this derivation into steps:

1. First we have to define our variables n and N and get a relationship between the two. The way to do this is by starting with steps to the left and steps to the right, where n will be the difference between them (current position, r-l), and N is the sum (total steps). 

2. Now we want to talk about probability. In our exercise we consider that the probability of moving to the right is equal to the probability of moving to the left. So we can write the probability of finding the particle at n after N steps by considering this, and the binomial coefficient.

3. We end up with an equation of factorials, which can be difficult to play around with. That is why, in this step, we use the Sterling's approximation (in the ln form, i.e., $lnx! \approx xlnx -x +ln(\sqrt(2 \pi x))$).

4. Then we do some mathematical manipulations. For this step you might find it useful to:
    1. separate ln terms from non-ln terms;
    2. factor out terms relates to $-N/2$ and $-n/2$;
    3. rewrite ln terms so they look like $ln(1+x)$, and isolate them. This is particularly helpful so we can use the Taylor series expansion $ln(1+x) \approx x$.
    4. consider that $N>n$ and therefore $n^{2}/N^{2} >> n^{2}/N$. This will help cancel terms that are proportional to $n^{2}/N^{2}$.
    5. get P(n,N) from the lnP expression.

5. Now all that's left to do is normalize P(n,N) so that the total value when integrating is equal to 1. Here, it can be helpful to consider the Jacobian of transformation where $dn = 1/2$.

Okay, let's do this step by step!

### 1. Derive the equation using Sterling's approximation - step by step

1. Defining our problem: we can name nr as the number of steps to the right, nl as the number of steps to the left, n as the position, and N as the number of steps. If you consider that each step is unitary, we can write:

$n = n_{r} - n_{l}$

$N = n_{r} + n_{l}$

Remember that the probability of moving to the right is equal to the probability of moving to the left. So:

$p_{r} = p_{l} = {1 \over 2}$

2. Now we can write the probability of finding the particle at n after N steps:

For that we use the binomial coefficient $\Omega(n,N)$:

$$\Omega(n,N) = {N! \over n_{r}! n_{l}!}$$

Writing in terms of n and N:

$$\Omega(n,N) = {N! \over (((N+n)/2)! ((N-n)/2)!)}$$

And the probability is:

$$P(n,N) = {\Omega(n,N) p_{r}^{n^{r}} p_{l}^{n^{l}}}$$

Or:

$$P(n,N) = {\Omega(n,N) (1/2)^{N}}$$

Adding the $\Omega$ expression:

$$P(n,N) = {N! \over (((N+n)/2)! ((N-n)/2)!)} (1/2)^{N}$$

3. Now let's turn this into an ln expression:

$$lnP(n,N) = ln(N!) - ln(((N+n)/2)!) - ln(((N-n)/2)!) - Nln2$$

For which we can use the Sterling's approximation ($lnx \approx xlnx -x +ln(\sqrt(2 \pi x))$):

$$lnP(n,N) = NlnN - N + ln(\sqrt(2 \pi N)) 
            
            \\ - ((N+n)/2)ln((N+n)/2) + (N+n)/2 - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N+n)/2))
            
            \\ - ((N-n)/2)ln((N-n)/2) - (N-n)/2 - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N-n)/2)) 
            
            \\ - Nln2$$

4. Now we can do some mathematical manipulation.

    1. First, let's separate ln terms from non-ln terms:

    $$lnP(n,N) = NlnN + ln(\sqrt(2 \pi N)) - ((N+n)/2)ln((N+n)/2) - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N+n)/2)) 
                \\ - ((N-n)/2)ln((N-n)/2) - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N-n)/2)) - Nln2
                \\ -N + (N+n)/2 - (N-n)/2 $$
    
    In the last line we can see that the non-ln terms cancel out, so we can simplify:

    $$lnP(n,N) = NlnN + ln(\sqrt(2 \pi N)) 
                \\ - ((N+n)/2)ln((N+n)/2) - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N+n)/2)) 
                \\ - ((N-n)/2)ln((N-n)/2) - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N-n)/2)) 
                \\ - Nln2$$
    
    2. Now we can factor out terms relates to $-N/2$ and $-n/2$:

    For this we note that the following terms can be rewritten:

    - $NlnN$ can be rewritten as $NlnN = -(N/2) (-2NlnN/N)$ and therefore $NlnN = -(N/2) (-ln(N^{2}))$
    - $- ((N+n)/2)ln((N+n)/2) = -(N/2) ln((N+n)/2) -(n/2) ln((N+n)/2)$
    - $- ((N-n)/2)ln((N-n)/2) = -(N/2) ln((N-n)/2) +(n/2) ln((N-n)/2)$
    - $ln(\sqrt(2 \pi N)) - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N+n)/2)) - ln(\sqrt(2 \pi (N-n)/2)) = {-ln {\sqrt{\pi^{2} (N+n) (N-n) \over (2 \pi N)}}}$
    
    Now rewriting the expression:

    $$lnP(n,N) = -(N/2) [ln(N^{2}) + ln((N+n)/2) + ln((N-n)/2)]
                \\ - (n/2) [ln((N+n)/2) - ln((N-n)/2)]
                \\ - ln {\sqrt{\pi^{2} (N+n) (N-n) \over (2 \pi N)}} -Nln2 $$
    
    Considering that $ln((N+n)/2) = ln(1/2) + ln(N+n) = -ln2 + ln(N+n)$:

    $$lnP(n,N) = -(N/2) [-ln(N^{2}) - ln2 + ln(N+n) -ln2 + ln(N-n)]
                \\ - (n/2) [-ln2 +ln(N+n) +ln2 - ln(N-n)]
                \\ - ln {\sqrt{\pi^{2} (N+n) (N-n) \over (2 \pi N)}} -Nln2 $$

    Therefore, and knowing that $-(N/2)[-2ln2] = -Nln2$:
    
    $$lnP(n,N) = -(N/2) [-ln(N^{2}) + ln(N+n) + ln(N-n)]
                \\ - (n/2) [ln(N+n) - ln(N-n)]
                \\ - ln {\sqrt{\pi^{2} (N+n) (N-n) \over (2 \pi N)}} $$
    
    Now considering that $ln {\sqrt{\pi^{2} (N+n) (N-n) \over (2 \pi N)}} = \sqrt{\pi (N^{2}-n^{2}) \over (2N)}$ we have:

    $$lnP(n,N) = -(N/2) [-ln(N^{2}) + ln(N+n) + ln(N-n)]
                \\ - (n/2) [ln(N+n) - ln(N-n)]
                \\ - \sqrt{\pi (N^{2}-n^{2}) \over (2N)} $$
    
    3. Now we want to rewrite ln in the form of ln(1+x) so that we can apply the approximation $ln(1+x) \approx x $:

    - $N-n = {N (1 - {n \over N})}$
    - $N+n = {N (1 + {n \over N})}$
    - $N^{2} - n^{2} = N^{2} (1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}})$, so:
        - ${N^{2} - n^{2} \over 2N}= {{N \over 2} (1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}})}$
        - ${N^{2} - n^{2} \over N^{2}} = (1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}})$
    
    Now we can rewrite the expression for lnP(n,N):

    $$lnP(n,N) = {-{1 \over 2} N [ ln(1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}}) ]
                \\ - {1 \over 2} n [ lnN(1 + {n \over N}) - lnN(1 - {n \over N})]
                \\ - {1 \over 2} ln{\pi N \over 2} [{1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}}}] }$$

    Considering that:

    - $- {1 \over 2} ln{\pi N \over 2} [{1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}}}] = - {1 \over 2} ln{\pi N \over 2} - {1 \over 2} ln[{1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}}}] $
    - $- {{1 \over 2} n [ lnN(1 + {n \over N}) - lnN(1 - {n \over N})]} 
            \\ = {{1 \over 2} n [ lnN + ln(1 + {n \over N}) -lnN - ln(1 - {n \over N})]} 
            \\ = {{1 \over 2} n [ ln(1 + {n \over N}) - ln(1 - {n \over N})]} $
    
    We can rewrite:

    $$lnP(n,N) = {-{1 \over 2} N [ ln(1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}}) ]
                \\ + {1 \over 2} n [ ln(1 + {n \over N}) - ln(1 - {n \over N})]
                \\ - {1 \over 2} ln{\pi N \over 2} - {1 \over 2} ln[{1 - {n^{2} \over N^{2}}}] }$$

    Now we can apply the approximation $ln(1+x) \approx x $:

    $$lnP(n,N) \approx {-{1 \over 2} N [ - {n^{2} \over N^{2}} ]
                \\ - {1 \over 2} n [ {n \over N} - {[- {n \over N}]}]
                \\ - {1 \over 2} ln{\pi N \over 2} - {1 \over 2} [{ - {n^{2} \over N^{2}}}] }$$

    $$lnP(n,N) \approx {n^{2}  \over 2N} - {n^{2}  \over N} - ln{\sqrt{\pi N \over 2}} + {n^{2} \over 2N^{2}} $$

    4. Now we can consider that $N>n$ and therefore $n^{2}/N^{2} << n^{2}/N$. We can cancel the last term:

    $$lnP(n,N) \approx {- n^{2}  \over 2N} - ln{\sqrt{\pi N \over 2}}$$
    
    5. Now returning to the original expression for P(n,N):

    $$P(n,N) = {1 \over \sqrt{\pi N \over 2}} e^{-n^{2}/2N}$$

6. We want to normalize it so that the integration of P(n,N) over all probabilities is equal to 1. To do so we can consider the Jacobian transformation $dn = 1/2$:

    $$\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} P(n,N) dn = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} {1 \over \sqrt{\pi N \over 2}} e^{-n^{2}/2N} dn = 1$$

    $$\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} {1 \over \sqrt{\pi N \over 2}} e^{-n^{2}/2N} {1 \over 2} dn = 1$$

    $$\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} {1 \over \sqrt{\pi N \over 2}} e^{-n^{2}/2N} dn = 2$$

    $$\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} {1 \over \sqrt{\pi N \over 2}} e^{-n^{2}/2N} dn = \sqrt{2 \pi N}$$

    Therefore, the normalized probability distribution is:

    $$P(n,N) = {1 \over \sqrt{2 \pi N}} e^{-n^{2}/2N}$$

## 2. Comparing the solution above with the point solution in 1D (see eq below), we conclude that $D=(1/2)<r^{2}>$. Compare this theoretical result with the computed root mean square displacement and the computed function P(n,N) (see the file output.dat). What is the diffusion coefficient, D, of this system? (see also page 87-88 in the book)

$$ p(x,t) = {1 \over {\sqrt{4 \pi D t}}} \exp {-x^{2} \over {4 D t}} $$

To extract the diffusion coefficient from the data, using the given expression, we can get the derivative of the mean square displacement with respect to time:

$$\frac{d}{dt} <r^{2}> = 2dD$$

Where d, the dimensionality of the system, is 1 (random walk in 1D). Therefore, the diffusion coefficient is:

$$D = \frac{1}{2} \frac{d}{dt} <r^{2}>$$

We can calculate the derivative of the mean square displacement with respect to time using the data from the file rms.dat.

If we have a linear relationship between the mean square displacement and time, we can calculate the slope of the line to get the diffusion coefficient. Since the slope is 1, the diffusion coefficient is 0.5. Here it is worth noting that there is equal probability of going to the left or to the right. Therefore, the mean displacement is 0 and there is no flow in any direction.

## 3. Change the program so that the probability to jump in one direction is 0.8. What happens?

Here we change the program random1d.c in line 53, from 0.5 (equal probability) to 0.8. We can see that the mean displacement is positive, which means that the system is biased to one of the directions. We can see from the plot of rms.dat that the mean square displacement no longer shows a linear relationship with time, which means that the diffusion coefficient is no longer constant. This is expected, since the system is no longer in equilibrium, and there is flow in one direction.




