# Block 3, exercise 3: Parallel Tempering

## Description
Parallel tempering can be used to drive low-temperature samplings, that initially would only sample the local minima, to cross energy barriers. This is done by running multiple replicas of the system at different temperatures, and occasionally swapping the configurations between replicas, if certain criteria are obeyed. 

In this exercise, the main goal is to compare the performance of samplings with and without swapping configurations. When swapping is allowed, the idea is that systems at lower temperatures could be able to access higher energy configurations.
It is important to make sure that the swapping is only happening when there is enough energy overlap between the systems.
It is also important to check if, for high temperatures, where systems with and without swapping should behave equally, the results are consistent.

## 1. Derive equation 8 
Equation 8 is given by:
$$ acc(1->2)/acc(2->1) < exp((1/T1 - 1/T2)*(E1 - E2)) $$

where $acc(1->2)$ is the acceptance probability of swapping from system 1 to system 2, $acc(2->1)$ is the acceptance probability of swapping from system 2 to system 1, $T1$ and $T2$ are the temperatures of the systems, and $E1$ and $E2$ are the energies of the systems.

From detailed balance, considering that $\alpha$ is the a priori probability of a move, we have that:
$$ N(1,\Beta_{1}) * N(2,\Beta_{2}) * \alpha[(1,\Beta_{1}),(2,\Beta_{2})->(2,\Beta_{1}),(1,\Beta_{2})] * acc[(1,\Beta_{1}),(2,\Beta_{2})->(2,\Beta_{1}),(1,\Beta_{2})]
\\ =
\\ N(2,\Beta_{1}) * N(1,\Beta_{2}) * \alpha[(2,\Beta_{1}),(1,\Beta_{2})->(1,\Beta_{1}),(2,\Beta_{2})] * acc[((2,\Beta_{1}),(1,\Beta_{2})->(1,\Beta_{1}),(2,\Beta_{2})] $$

We consider the a priori probability of a move to be 1, and the number of particles in each system to be the same. We can then write the equation above as:

$$ acc(1->2)/acc(2->1) < exp([-\Beta_{1}*U(2) -\Beta_{2}*U(1)]) / exp([-\Beta_{1}*U(1) -\Beta_{2}*U(2)]) $$

Which can be simplified to equation 8.

## 2. Run the code without swapping (no need to modify code yet)
You should run the code for different temperatures, but keep the number of systems (ntemp) fixed at 1. This means that you are running the code individually for different systems where each system is at a different temperature. For nstep=100000, rho=2.5, ppt=0.2 and temperatures 0.001 0.01 0.025 0.05, you should notice that only the system at 0.05 temperature is able to sample the whole position space. The other systems are stuck in local minima.

## 3. Modify the code to include swapping
Here, you should first select at random the systems that will be swapped (each system is at one temperature, defined in the line Temperatures in input, make sure you set the temperatures from low to high).
Make sure that the systems (or temperatures) selected are still within the range of total number of systems.
Then, you use a random number to decide if the swap will happen. It will happen if the random number is smaller than the acceptance probability of swapping, which is given by equation 8.
You should keep track of the total count of swapping attempts and the total sum of successful swaps.
If swapping is allowed to happen, you should swap only the positions of the particles between the two systems (not energy or temperature).
With the settings nstep=100000, rho=2.5, ppt=0.2 and temperatures 0.001 0.003 0.015 0.05, you can test the code for different number of systems (1, 2, 3, 4...). For those settings, notice that the swapping is only successful (i.e., the system with the lowest temperature also samples the whole position space) when the number of systems is 4.
Use the plot of energy distribution to check if the overlap between the systems is satisfactory. Low overlap will result in low swapping success.

## 4. Compare the results for high temperatures (T=0.05)
You can use the results from the previous steps. You can compare the results for the system at T=0.05 for the cases with and without swapping. For the swapping case, select the case where you have 4 systems, i.e., the last system is at temperature 0.05. Notice that you need to truncate the data from the swapping case, since the position distribution englobes all the four systems, and utilize the last part of the truncated data to compare (this should be equivalent to the case of no swapping for temperature 0.05). The energy distribution should also match.