# Block 2: Exercise 1 - Estimating the value of $\pi$

In this exercise we will use Monte Carlo sampling to estimate the value of $\pi$.

## 1. How can $\pi$ be calculated from the fraction of points that fall in the circle? Complete the code.

The idea is to generate a large number of random points in a square and then count the fraction of points that fall within a circle inscribed in the square. The area of the circle is $\pi r^2$ and the area of the square is $4r^2$, where $r$ is the radius of the circle. The ratio of the area of the circle to the area of the square is then $\pi/4$. Here we fix the radius to be 0.5, and what we ask for is the ratio between the length of the square side and the diameter of the circle - if this is 1 or higher, then the circle is inscribed in the square.

So for the code we want to generate random coordinates x and y, and then check if the point is inside the circle. We then count the number of points that fall inside the circle and divide by the total number of points to get the fraction of points that fall inside the circle (this ratio is the same as the ratio between areas). The value of $\pi$ can then be estimated as 4 times this fraction.

To get random x,y coordinates we can use a random number (in C it goes from 0 to 1), then shift it so that the origin is in the middle of the circle and the square: this means subtracting 0.5. Then, since the ratio between l/d can change, we need to multiply the random number by this ratio, so that we make sure that the points sampled could cover the whole circle *and* the whole square. Finally, we need to check if the point is inside the circle, which we can do with:

$$x^2 + y^2 < r^2$$

where $r$ is the radius of the circle, in our case, 0.5.

We keep count of number of hits within the circle, and number of total trials (i.e. hits within the square).

## 2. How would you expect that the accuracy of the result depends on the ratio $l/d$ and the number of generated coordinates? 

- $l/d$ cannot be less than 1, since the circle must be inscribed in the square. Otherwise, if $l/d$<1, you might encounter a case where coordinates x=0.5,y=0.5 (that are plausible since radius is 0.5) would not fall inside the circle or the square. That means that you would get trials that are not valid.

- The number of generated coordinates should be as large as possible, since the more trials you have, the more accurate the result will be. This is a Monte Carlo method, and the accuracy of the result depends on the number of trials.

- $l/d$ should be as close to 1 as possible, to minimize the number of trials that do not fall inside the circle. If $l/d$ is very large, then the number of trials that fall inside the circle will be very small, and therefore more trials will be needed to get an accurate result.

## 3. Derive a formula to calculate the relative standard deviation of the estimate of $\pi$. Hint: the distribution of successful hits is binomial. Is there an optimal ratio?

Get p as the relation between the area of the circle and the area of the square. Then you can write the expectation values $E(x)$ and $E(x^2)$ for the binomial distribution, and you can do so in terms of n (number of trials). The variance is $E(x^2) - E(x)^2$. The relative standard deviation is then the variance divided by the expectation value. 

$$p = \frac{\pi * d^2}{4 * l^2}$$

$$n*E(x) = n*\sum{x*p(x)} = n*(0*(1-p) + 1*(p)) = np$$ 

for n trials.

$$n*E(x^2) = n*(\sum{x^2*p(x)}) = n*(0^2*(1-p) + 1^2*(p)) = n*p$$

$$ n*(\sigma^2) = n*(E(x^2) - E(x)^2) = n*(p - p^2) = np(1-p)$$ 

for n trials.

Therefore the relative standard deviation is (in terms of \pi and d and l):

$$ \frac{\sigma}{E(x)} = \sqrt{\frac{1-p}{np}} = \sqrt{\frac{1}{n} * \frac{4l^2}{\pi d^2} - \frac{1}{n}}$$

With the final expression you will see that n should be as large as possible and l/d should be as close to 1 as possible in order to minimze the relative standard deviation.

## 4. Is it a good idea to calculate many decimals of $\pi$ using this method? 

- Hint: you can use insights from item 3, and test how the relative error changes (i.e. how many decimals can you get right?) when changing l/d and the number of trials.

- The relative error will decrease as the number of trials increases, and as l/d approaches 1. However, the way that the relative error decreases with increasing n is such that you need a very large number of trials to get a good estimate of $\pi$. The dependence is n^(-1/2). This means that to get an extra decimal of $\pi$, you need to increase the number of trials by a factor of 100. This is not a very efficient way to calculate $\pi$.