# Block 1 - Exercise 2 - Long explanation/solution

The exercise talks about a system with N energy levels, and the energies of each level are multiples of $\epsilon$, where level N will have energy $(N)*\epsilon$. Therefore we can consider the energy of a certain level to be proportional to its number. 

We have a canonical ensemble for classical particles and the Boltzmann distribution in this case is the following:

$P_{i} = g_{i}*e^{-E_{i}/k_{B}T}$

Where $g_{i}$ is the degeneracy of energy levels, i is the energy level, $E_{i}$ is its energy, $k_{B}$ is the Boltzmann constant. 

If $k_{B}=1$ and knowing that $\beta=1/T$ we can rewrite:

$P_{i} = g_{i}*e^{-E_{i}\beta}$

The specific shape is influenced by the degeneracy os the particular energy levels giving a distinct weight to different energy levels.

In the first exercise, degeneracy is 1, so:

$P_{i} = e^{-E_{i}\beta}$

$E_{i} = \epsilon i$, and let's consider $\epsilon=1$ for simplicity. Therefore we have:

$P_{i} = e^{-i\beta}$

The only part you need to change in this exercise is how you define the distribution at each energy level (i.e., the temp variable inside the loop (line 40) in boltzmann.c). This only needs to be done for exercises 2 and 3, as the code is already ready for exercise 1.

## 1. Occupancy of each level for different values of the temperature, in the case where degeneracy is 1. 
At low tempertures, only the lowest energy levels are occupied. At higher temperatures, the occupancy of higher energy levels increases.

## 2. Change the program in such a way that the degeneracy of energy level i equals i+1. What do you see?
Here we change the degeneracy from 1 to i+1. This is what you have to change now in the code. The occupancy of the energy levels is now influenced by the degeneracy of the levels.

With higher degeneracy, the number of energy levels that are occupied at low temperatures increases. This is because the energy of degenerate levels is the same, so there is no extra energy cost to occupy them. Let's say for example we fix levels 1,2 and 3. In the case where they are non degenerate, level 1 (lowest energy) will be more easily occupied at a low temperature T. When 1 and 2 have the same energies, however, the occupancy of level 2 will increase at the same low temperature T. If all levels have the same energy, all of them will be equally occupied at a certain temperature.

## 3. Modify the program in such a way that the occupation of the energy levels as well as the partition function (q) is calculated for a linear rotor with moment of inertia I.

From equation 3, considering that $\hbar^{2}/I=1$, we have:

$E_{i} = i(i+1)/2$

Therefore we need to change this in the code. Another thing to change is the degeneracy, which is now $2i+1$. Therefore we have:

$P_{i} = (2i+1)*e^{-i(i+1)\beta/2}$

If you run the code with this modification for different temperatures, you can test whether the results are consistent with the expectations. To do so, compute the partition function q given by:

$q = \sum_{i=0}^{N} (2i+1)*e^{-i(i+1)\beta/2}$ 

i.e. the sum of all distributions (for each energy level). Remember that the canonical partition function q (also denoted as Z sometimes) is the normalization denominator. It results from the constraint that the probabilities of all accessible states must add up to 1.

In the approximate case, the q value is expected to be $q=2T$. You can test this in your case by dividing the q value by 2T and see if it is close to 1 (or dividing q/T and seeing if it is close to 2).